21 Allergy season begins as giant ragweed starts to bloom.
Young fox and gray squirrels search for home territories.
Blue-winged teal begin returning from the north.
Boneset blooms, attracting swarms of pollinators.
Hazelnuts ripen. Look for their ruffled cases.
“Turkey feet” seed heads of big bluestem grass mature.
Elderberries begin ripening. Cloudless sulfur butterflies begin migrating north.
Male white-tailed deer rub velvet off antlers. Look for their rubs on small trees.
Thirteen-lined and Franklin’s ground squirrels begin to gorge.
Look for tarantulas crossing roads in southwestern Missouri.
Colonies of bryozoans reach their largest sizes. Look for their jellylike masses in warm, quiet ponds and lakes. 8-31
Ospreys begin fall migration.
Harmless black-and-yellow garden spiders build webs.
Peak of fall shorebird migration continues through the middle of the month.
Jewelweed seedpods explode when touched.
Watch for lightning bug larvae (glowworms) in low water.
Freshwater jellyfish may be abundant in reservoirs.
Monarch butterflies begin migrating south in large numbers.
Caspian terns migrate in flocks across Missouri and feed in wetlands.
Blue-winged teal migration is at its peak.
Black bears gorge to prepare for winter.
Common nighthawks begin migration.
White-tailed deer breed now through November.
Thirteen-lined and Franklin’s ground squirrels begin hibernation.
Deer mice store seeds and nuts underground and in nests.
White bass school through mid-October. Meadow jumping mice begin hibernation.
Sassafras, sumac, and Virginia creeper show fall color.
Puffballs and other fall mushrooms start to appear.
Marbled salamander breeding is at its peak.
Swallows stage in large flocks.
After a cold front, watch for migrating broad-winged hawks. Persimmons start to ripen.
Listen for migrating birds during evening hours. Cardinal flowers bloom along Ozark streams.
Chimney swifts begin migration. Spider wasps are busy capturing spiders that will become food for their larvae.
Elk begin bugling.
Tiger salamanders move to ponds in the rain. Black walnuts and hickory nuts ripen and begin to fall.
Fawns have lost their spots.
Acorns begin to fall. Fox and gray squirrels bury nuts for winter food.
White pelicans congregate at wetlands through mid-October.
Snakes begin winter dormancy. Bittersweet starts to ripen.
Pawpaw fruits ripen. Katydids sing in trees at night.
Black gum, bittersweet, and dogwood show fall color.
Bats gather at cave entrances to mate and hibernate. Jack-o’-lantern mushrooms begin forming orange clusters at the bottom of trees.
Timer rattlesnakes enter hibernation.
Muskies become active.
Watch for goldfinches eating sunflower seeds.
Peak of fall color begins.
Look for hen of the woods mushrooms.
Most ruby-throated hummingbirds have left Missouri.
Listen for the trill of field crickets.
Downy gentians bloom on prairies.
Average day of first frost in northern Missouri.
Watch for flocks of blue jays flying low.
Hellbender breeding is at its peak.
Blue jays gather acorns and fly to other trees to hide them. Sticktights collect on pants.
New England asters bloom, providing nectar for late-migrating monarchs. Annual solar eclipse occurs.
Average day of first frost in central and southern Missouri. Order next year’s Natural Events Calendar.
Early wintering sparrows arrive.
Elk rut peaks. 
Box turtles dig shallow burrows and go dormant to survive winter.
Listen for quail covey calls half an hour before dawn.
Look for spiders ballooning on clear, windy days.
Peak fall color begins in maples, oaks, and hickories. Now is a great time to hike a trail or float a stream.
Orionid meteor shower peaks.
Don’t miss the fall colors of bald cypress and water tupelo trees at Bootheel swamps.
Green-winged teal migration is at its peak.
Juncos arrive from Canada.
Arrival of American wigeon, pintail, and gadwall ducks is at its peak.
Striped skunks are fattening up for winter.
Beavers are active during the day, gathering food and preparing their lodges for winter.
Lady beetles congregate on the sunny side of houses.
Peak fall color ends. Bullfrogs begin hibernating.
Leave fall leaves on the ground for dormant pollinators.
HALLOWEEN
Put out bird-feeding stations.
Crayfish begin mating.
Scaup and ring-necked duck populations peak.
Woodchucks and chipmunks are asleep in underground nests.
Daylight saving time ends. Pecans begin to ripen.
Listen for the last cricket calls.
Long-tailed salamanders breed through early March in springs and cool, rocky streams.
Scarlet oak leaves turn deep red, offering a striking contrast to shortleaf pines in the Ozarks.
Look for mallards.
Listen for flocks of greater white-fronted geese migrating at night. Their calls sound like squeaky, laughing yelps.
Look for old bird nests while walking through the woods.
Wooded landscapes have lost their color. “Red autumn” has turned into “gray autumn.”
Look for frost flowers with first hard frost.
Some red bats forgo migrations and overwinter in leaf litter and among dead leaves clinging to trees.
Most leaves have fallen.
Hellbender eggs begin hatching.
Leonid meteor shower peaks.
Birds begin gathering at feeders.
November 19th: no entry
Collect pecans after they drop from trees.
Mammals seek winter shelters.
Scan leafless trees for gray nests of bald-faced hornets.
Bush honeysuckle remains green in the forest understory. Now is time to locate and remove these invasive shrubs.
Listen for large flocks of snow geese migrating at night.
November 25th: no entry
Red admiral butterflies search for overwintering sites.
Milkweed pods open.
On warm days, look for raccoons sunbathing on limbs high up in trees.
Voles and mice feed on grass and seeds under the snow.
Female black bears are in their winter dens.
Great horned owls are courting. Listen for Hoo, hoo-oo, hoo-oo.
River otters breed now through early April.
Barred owls are courting. Listen for Who cooks for you? Who cooks for you all?
Deer eat sumac berries until the supply runs out.
Bald eagles arrive in northern Missouri.
Look for pine siskins and purple finches at bird feeders.
Raccoons den up during snow and ice storms.
Snow goose populations peak at wetland areas.
Look for oyster mushrooms during damp weather.
Male black bears are in their winter dens.
Eastern cottontails use abandoned dens during heavy snow.
Bald eagles arrive in southern Missouri.
Geminid meteor show peaks.
Look for Adam and Eve orchid, which appears as a green-and-white striped leaf that grows flat on the forest floor.
Skunks sleep when the temperature drops to 15 F or colder.
The leaves of Christmas ferns are green on wooded slopes.
Freezing and thawing form ice sculptures in streams.
Fox and gray squirrels breed through February.
Red foxes begin mating this month. Listen for their barks and squalls.
Look for goldfinches, cardinals, titmice, chickadees, and nuthatches.
FIRST DAY OF WINTER/SOLSTICE: shortest day of year
Canada goose population in Missouri is at its peak.
Beavers feed on sapling reserves.
Watch suet feeders for woodpeckers: downy, hairy, pileated and red-bellied.
CHRISTMAS
KWANZAA (lasts 7 days)
Golden mice huddle together in nests to stay warm.
During deep snowfall, bobcats stay in shelters.
Squirrels gather in nests to conserve energy.
Look for bracket mushrooms on tree trunks: cinnabar polypore, artist conk, and turkey tail.
Hang up next year’s Natural Events Calendar.

